Hey what's up everyone and welcome back to another video. In this video we're going to see how we can
combine Matplotlib, Plotly, Seaborn, & all of your other favorite Python visualization libraries
into a Shiny for Python app. One of the things that I love about Shiny is that you have this
capability. I feel like so many times in the past I've done some analysis in Python and then been
working for a client, working for a company, that requires me to port that into something very
specific not using Python. Whereas if I had Shiny for Python you know five years ago I could have
easily just spun up a dashboard using all the same visualizations. As a reminder in the last
video in this series we built a dashboard that looked like this with some placeholders where we
can put different Python visualizations. In this video we're going to fill in those placeholders
with like a heat map you know another type of heat map of the actual US and then change this
top graph to use Altair instead of Plotly. And throughout this process we'll learn about all
the different kind of annotations and how you can incorporate many more libraries than just what we
cover in this video. And then finally we're ultimately working towards a dashboard that
looks like this by the end of the series. I think the only thing we might not cover in this video
is really the styling and the coloring and some of these final tweaks. So we might not have all
these colors set by the end of this video but we'll have all the graphs and we'll leave all
the styling details for video five. Should be a lot of fun.
So to get started with the code I recommend going to this GitHub URL. I'll link it in the description
and depending on what part you want to jump in on you can scroll down and see the different
parts of the series. We're going to be building off of the source code for part three in this video
so you can go ahead and look at the code right here or if you want to specifically have all this
code locally what you could do is you could fork the repo so that you have your own personal copy
of it. Once it's forked in your personal copy you're going to click code you're going to copy
this URL open up the terminal window and you're going to want to do git clone and paste in that
link. You're going to navigate into that folder and then you want to get all the branches in that
repo. You're going to do git fetch origin and then finally you can do git checkout video three
and it will switch to the branch that has all the code from video number three. You want to
navigate into the sales folder. You might need to install if we look in that folder
there's requirements.txt. You might need to install the requirements.txt by doing pip3
install-r requirements.txt and then the final step that you might want to do if you use VS Code
you might have access to this code period to just directly open that from your terminal
and we see we have our app.py right here and I can click run and the dashboard loads right there
and we can start working on this code. You might even create another branch that's separate from
this code however you want to approach it but that's my general recommendation.
First we'll quickly want to change this to video four of five but after that I would say a good
starting point would be to really understand how to render matplotlib visualizations using Shiny
and the kind of keyword for that is this render.plot function. So how about we start down
here with the heat map and we'll start by just doing a simple matplotlib plot but then we'll
make a heat map using Seaborn and ultimately there's a lot of Python graphic libraries that
are all based off of matplotlib. So even though this render.plot really focuses on matplotlib
it covers so many different libraries in Python because so many are based off of matplotlib.
So we can go down here to this heat map and we could start plotting a chart down there using
matplotlib. So to do that we'd want to add a render.plot annotation here. We'll want to pass
in a function so I'll call this plot sales by time how about and then in that we'll pass in
our matplotlib code. So as a reminder if you're using matplotlib you can import it by doing
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt that's typically how you'll see it. Down here we could immediately
plot something with matplotlib by doing like plot dot how about bar chart. We could pass in
some random numbers for our x pass in some random numbers for our y and that will actually
work right there. As you can see we have a little chart but let's make this actually use our data.
So as a reminder we're using sales data we have a bunch of different products how many times they
were ordered the price of the order and when they were ordered so this is like a unix timestamp
but ultimately we can convert that to a date time object and get more easy like months and hours
from it. So if we want to do sales by time and I'm thinking of time of day so what hour from 0 to 24
were these purchases made well to do that we might want to add another column. So we're accessing our
data frame using this dat reactive calc that's over here at the top of our code found right here.
I'm going to add another column to that I'm just going to call this hour and hour is going to be
equal to df order date our date time object dot dt dot hour we can easily access a numeric integer
hour from that. If we go down to our data frame just go to the right we see we have an hour now
14 20 18 that all makes sense. I think the max actually is going to be 23 so if you wanted to
like offset this by one you could but I think it actually makes sense starting at 0 going to 23
because ultimately once you get to 24 turns the next day so you don't actually want to see 24
here in our data and then we can access a simple bar chart by doing something like sales by time
or sales by hour how about equals df dot value count or df how about hour and then grab the
value counts of that if we printed sales by hour and rerun this or actually just open our terminal
we see we get something that looks like this that has the hour and then the count
the last step to make this a little bit easier for us I would recommend doing a reset index
and then watch what it prints out now it prints out a nice data frame with hour and count so we
could easily pass in a x equals sales by hour hour and then a y which would equal or I guess
they use height now these days but I think if you pass in y it's fine too sales by hour count
what does that give us I guess it likes the height now we see we get something that looks
like this and you could pass in like your x ticks different uh matplotlib keyword arguments
so our x ticks might be like numpy do we have numpy in imported I guess we don't so I'm going
guess we don't so I'm going to import that as well
you could do something like np.arange 0 to 24 I think that would give us the right amount of ticks
is there no x ticks keyword argument when in doubt google search or actually
you use compile it add tick marks from 0 to 23 to my matplotlib chart
except so it looks like I have to do it separately that's weird
run this
and save it oops cool so that gives us all the tick marks that we need that's a simple
matplotlib part chart you could obviously customize this as you need it knows to output
that plot object but you could also return a figure here and it still would work but we actually
want a heat map using seaborn so we can also do that within this render.plot function if you go
to seaborn the documentation you'll see that it's a python data visualization library based
on matplotlib and there's a lot of other matplotlib based or matplotlib adjacent libraries that we can
use some immediately that I know about are like plot9 you can use pandas directly there's a lot
of pandas.plot functionality that you can immediately tap into so I could do something
let's see what would it make sense to do sales by hour dot plot and then I could pass in the
column names hour x equals hour y equals count and watch this I didn't do exactly what I wanted
it to do but you can see that it does have plotting ability I think I need to specify
that this is a bar chart kind equals bar so we see we get a bar chart now and in this situation
it looks like it sorted it from greatest to smallest but I would really want it to be in
order of 0 to 24 so you might be able to you know you can specify these things you can change this
around but pandas also works you can use libraries like holoviews xray geopandas a lot of matplotlib
based plotting you can do I'm gonna delete this real quick just wanted to show that as an example
but what would it look like to do a seaborne heat map like we have in the ultimately the final plot
that we're working towards to do that yeah go to the seaborne documentation maybe look at api
look at somewhere in here probably have a heat map heat map and look at how it's done we have
a pretty simple heat map that we want to deal with we want to just have basically a basically a one
day array but I think that only takes in two days so we kind of have to play around with it a little
bit so I'm going to also import seaborne
and we can change our chart to do something like probably want to keep the sales by hour
we look at our docs basically takes in that 2d array so we just need to format our values to be
this 2d shape we could do that in here by switching this up a little bit so instead
of resetting index I'm going to actually re-index it I'm going to pass in that mpa range 0 to 24
basically set this and sort it to be between 0 and 24 but use that as the index so no longer is like
our own separate column we have that we also as like good practice with re-index you should
probably have a fill value so if ever you don't have one of those numbers we want to have that
still show up in the heat map so it would just be zero in this situation we're counting a lot of
product sales so we should always have greater than zero value but this is just good practice
to do what else do we need to do here I think ultimately we might get errors if we try to do
the heat map by just passing this sales by hour I think it expects it might might take a day to
let's see pass the fill value into the wrong spot
very close I think we're going to have to reshape this
reshape we want it one column and then however many rows we need which would be like 24 so if
I could reshape this is 24 to 1 it should work I guess we got to do sales by hour dot values
dot reshape to turn into numpy and then numpy accepts
data let's see what happens there nice that's our sales by hour I don't love these colors
and I would love I'm trying to think of other things if we look at our final visualization
we have like the numbers right inside of the heat map and I think that looks kind of good so
I'll pass it in here and then I'll pass it in here and then I'll pass it in here and then I'll
right inside of the heat map and I think that looks kind of good so I'll pass in some parameters
to this to give it more of that look so annotation equals true and honestly there's a few different
ways you can look into the documentation to see these different options you can also honestly
use like a large language model like chat gpt or something to help you get it exactly how you want
it so a little bit of combo of this is how I figured out how to kind of get parameters how I
wanted didn't need any x tick labels zero there's kind of unnecessary y tick labels it's kind of
nice to have more of an hour look so you could do a list comprehension here which just do something
like i colon zero zero for i in range 24 and I think that's probably good some good parameters
run this what does the updated data graph look like oh need some commas do I have commas everywhere
oh wow that's looking a lot more like it I think the only other thing we would want to add is some
labels and you can actually use the same from that plot lib labels to fix this so plot.title
might be something like number of orders by hour of day the x label will probably be
hour of day and the y label would just be order count that got a nice heat map there perfect
that looks good and you see all this it knows to render the plot properly and as we see we're
editing some matplotlib things but we ultimately use seaborn and we get that chart there so you
have access to all of seaborn and you'll use the render.plot for that now what are our other
options here so the other big category of things that we might plot with shiny are ipython widgets
so if you go to this documentation page I'll link it in the description we can see that there's all
sorts of ways to plot jupyter widgets within shiny so some that show up right out of the box
here are altair bokeh plotly pydec etc and what you'll see if you read into this documentation
is they all kind of are under this subcategory render widget but kind of give some fancy special
things for specific libraries that posit has specifically built support for like altair bokeh
plotly and pydec you'll see that instead of using the render widget annotation for some of these
you can directly use a annotation that's specific to that library like render plotly here so to do
that we need to import render plotly from shiny widgets and then we can kind of leverage plotly
as we expect and we've already actually seen this in our code so if i go back to our vs code
we see that we have render plotly already being accessed here so you can kind of keep that as is
but let's say instead of using plotly here for this first graph so we'll see this first graph
if i make it a little bit bigger how about we switch that to use render altair so the altair
python library how would we change it to allow us to do that well the first thing we need to do
is also import render altair it's the first step we might also just import render widget if there's
other extra cases that we want to deal with here okay and now how do we convert plotly to rent
altair honestly what i might try is seeing what our good old friend chat gbt or whatever your llm
of choice recommends for this so i might type in convert this plotly code into altair in python
okay and i'm curious if i just copied this code and i pasted it in here
we're going to have success well we're not going to have success immediately
because we're not even importing altair so import altair as alt
then it is saying sales over time altair missing two positional oh this is not necessary to pass
in because we already know it i guess we would have to grab df equals dot
then our city is input dot city it's kind of confused by the uh shiny stuff what does this
look like now city is not defined what are you talking about input dot city
city come on does this work look at that we already got a nice looking uh
altair chart oh this is rendered plotly it actually works just fine it's just the type
of thing is if in the future something changes and this needs to be very custom for plotly
you might run into errors here so you'd want to actually use the annotation render altair
so if there's a specific annotation for the library that you're using go ahead and use it
but if you don't see one for your ipython widget just use render widget and that will kind of work
for most situations that you need we can see that if we change this it does update we kind of get
good results overall that's pretty cool to see so other than altair plotly bokeh
pydex what other options do you have with ipython widgets well this is a list of different
visualization jupyter widgets that are available so if you see any of these that you particularly
like you're probably in a good spot to use the render widget function i don't know if these have
all been tested with shiny but i think that this is you know something to explore a bit further
i'll link the the list of these jupyter or these python widgets in the description but also know
that if you go into other you'll see that this is actually also linked in the documentation
one other one i would worth what's worth mentioning is like ipy leaflet i think it's
pretty cool to see so we can see like a map like this is rendered via the render widget annotation
all right what else what else what else what else all right we've done two of the changes
we got our heat map and we got our altair chart here i think the last thing we want to do is
maybe do a sales by location heat map and the ipy leaflet is one way to approach this i feel like for
heat maps one library that i have particularly liked is the folium library so i think it's worth
discussing the folium library a bit so our code for this placeholder is
right here sales by location map and how can we use the folium library well the first thing we
need to do and i might even just pull in something for this to folium heat map example
okay folium.map i'm probably going to import it install it folium map
you can do different types of tiles i want to heat map i don't need to see all these
okay so we ultimately need a data frame that has latitude longitude and a weight value that's the
three things that we need that's basically what we want to replicate
okay so to import folium import folium like this all these should be in the requirements.txt so
you should already have these if you don't just do a pip install of these different libraries
okay if we look at our data frame we actually already have latitude and longitude there
so we basically just need the counts the counts for those latitudes and longitudes
to figure out our sales locations so our counts in this situation would be the quantity ordered
and the heat map will be smart enough to find if you have similar latitudes and longitudes
and similar quantity or in quantity orders by each other ultimately you know your heat map will
show those red zones what we'll probably want to do is just go ahead and take our we'll want to get
our how about we call this def plot us heat map we would want to get our data frame which is equal
to the reactive calc and then maybe we have a smaller data frame that's just basically like
heat map data equals data frame latitude longitude and quantity ordered
you might want to get the values off of that let's print the heat map data real quick
and a good exercise would be to try to get this heat map working on your own before you see the
final code where is this data i guess this is maybe not getting rendered yet so i could do
render widget now we see the data that looks good that looks like heat map data so from folium if i
go back to that the first thing we wanted to do was build a map so that might look something like
this this is a latitude longitude start location you kind of have to play around with this i would
say to figure out what works best but it's a good starting point then we need to add data to that map
well we can to do that we can do heat map and we can pass in the heat map data and we want to add
that to our map and then ultimately we want to return our map and so let's see what happens when
we run this it looks like we have some sort of error and it tells us that it's having trouble
turning it into an ipy widget and it's instead recommends using shiny's render ui decorator
so let's go ahead and try that render.ui
and wow we got the location map work and let's go i think one thing that's interesting is folium
versus ipython leaflet this ultimately gives you a object that has like html source code all kind
of built into it if you printed map dot representation html you'd actually see all the
html associated with this map get printed out and i think as a result of that like we can easily
render this html render.ui is like the keyword the annotation to use whenever you need to render html
and so something about this folium library isn't friendly with ipython widgets but it does have
this html representation so if you ever need a render html within your shiny apps render.ui is
probably going to be what you need and we see that we imported that over here or i guess we're
using it off of render so that's cool to see that's a nice chart for us and let's see i mean that
covers basically what we want to cover we have everything here it's really a matter of styling
at this point and that's what we're going to really focus on in the next video but i think
one final thing that's worth discussing is some different some different options we could use
actually there's a couple things i think are worth mentioning quick so if you go to the
documentation i think there's some additional render annotations that are worth knowing so one
that we have actually already seen before is this render data frame so we see it down at the bottom
of our code we're rendering this data frame but i think one thing that is helpful to also know about
rendering data frame is there's some additional customization options that we have available to us
one is there's these render data tables and render data grid so i'll look at render data grid
first basically it gives us just a little bit more customizability of our our data frame so if
i instead did render dot data grid and then passed in the data frame or part of the data frame as we
see we're doing here and then ran that we're gonna not going to see any immediate changes
but this now gives me some customization options one that i like is filters so if i turn that to
true and then look at our app we're going to see now we have these different filters so like
if i only wanted macbook pros i could type in macbook pro and we see we're only sorting by that
maybe i only wanted addresses that include like san francisco so i could type in here i could
i could limit my quantity to order to only like orders that were over
five or something or i guess maybe in our sub sample we don't have any but
min three orders at a time all sorts of nice filters you can do especially when you have a
bigger data frame i only took the head of this data frame as a sample but can be very helpful
to have filters you could also render this instead of as a data frame but as a table
which looks a bit different and you could have a similar render data table
option to give you the same customizability now if we look at the updated dashboard
i guess actually i think we pass this in normal rendered a table
we get a different looking table here and you could have also done rendered a data frame
passed in render.data table
and you get something that looks like this and you could also have passed in that same filters
get those options you also could like make things editable here with the data table render
you could add a selection mode
equals row for example and basically that then lets you highlight specific rows
it's all kind of personal preference but you could also do that if you wanted to
for example and basically that then lets you highlight specific rows
it's all kind of personal preference but if i run this again
now i can like click on these tables so different options you have by using data table and data grid
other things you might want to know about go to the documentation and there's like rendering text
so if you just want to render text on your screen we might have seen this already you can use the
render.text decorator you might want to render an image let's say in your dashboard you can use the
render.image you can also render code so if i find express.render.code somewhere here
i guess that the code is specific i remember seeing it in dot core render.code
if you needed to show code on your screen you could use the render.code decorator
it's like the render.code for example if i did with ui.card and i did at render.code
render.code passed in show code and then i just like returned
code equals print hello
we see that rendered here if it's helpful to do so things like that i use the three code syntax
if i needed to add a lot of code i think one thing that might come here in the code range is
syntax highlighting based on language but not available currently but you can play around with
that cool that's the basics really really powerful by to be able to render all these different types
of charts in the single same dashboard really encourage you to play around with this and see
what you can build all right that's all we're going to cover in this video if you enjoyed
this video make sure to throw it a thumbs up subscribe if you haven't already in the final
video in the series we will see how we can style all of this and make it all look very nice and
pretty again all resources mentioned in this video are linked in the description check those out
till next time everyone peace